# 704708679-The-Complete-Field-Guide-for-Solar-Sales-Leaders-SPOTIO

****The COMPLETE FIELD GUIDE for SOLAR SALES LEADERS WelcomeTHE COMPLETE FIELD GUIDE FOR SOLAR SALES LEADERS SPOTIO has been helping solar field sales take their teams to the next level and achieve more since 2014. T oday, we work with hundreds of residential and commercial solar companies worldwide. From our unique position, we’ve been able to distill down the best tips, tricks, and benchmark performance data to help the entire industry overcome today’s challenges and continue to thrive in the future. In the following pages, we’ll address where the solar industry stands in 2022 and where it might be headed in the future. Then we’ll talk about the three most common sales motions in solar sales, before teaching you how to optimize your company’s solar sales funnel. By the end of this guide, you’ll have a solid understanding of the industry and how to best position your solar company within it to maximize results and success. One thing before we get started: this resource is written for sales team leaders. If y ou’re a sales rep, you’ll still get something out of this guide, but its main purpose is to help those in leadership positions build and manage more effective sales teams. Now that we’ve got that out of the way, let’s get started! 2 Welcome T able of Contents The Solar Industry Common Solar Sales Motions Optimizing the Solar Sales Funnel The Solar Sales Funnel Prospecting Connecting Considering Decision Post-Win More Tips from the Pros About SPOTIOWelcomeTHE COMPLETE FIELD GUIDE FOR SOLAR SALES LEADERS 2 3 4 8 9 10 11 14 17 20 23 25 28 3 The Solar IndustryWHERE DO WE STAND IN 2022? The solar industry has experienced numerous challenges in the past couple of years. COVID-19 and other issues created supply chain constraints, increased shipping costs, and caused the price of key commodities to skyrocket. Despite these headwinds, solar has thrived. According to Deloitte, capacity installations were at an all-time high in 2021. The outlook is e ven better for 2022, as PV Magazine reports a 36% year-over-year growth in 2022 thus far. What’s causing the solar boom? The combination of new technologies, new business models, greater infr astructure, and a governmental commitment to clean energy are the main causes of the recent explosion of growth in this industry. Read on to see more analysis about each of these causes. 4 1New TechnologyTHE SOLAR INDUSTRY: WHERE DO WE STAND IN 2022? Solar energy has exploded in popularity. The heightened interest has fueled investment, leading to new technologies such as advanced batteries, energy storing, and EV charging. As new technologies emerge, the general cost of solar goes down. In fact, the cost of large-scale solar projects has plunged by 85% in the last decade. It makes sense, as new technologies tend to lower manufacturing costs and improve efficiency. The extreme affordability of solar — both for the companies installing the systems and the consumers buying them — is another reason why most experts predict industry growth. 2New Business Models Speaking of costs, solar photovoltaic (PV) systems are extremely cost-effective. As demand for these systems increases, the cost to produce them naturally goes down. These lower costs have led to the development of new business models, which target new markets. At the time of this writing, 22 states and Washington D.C. support community solar, which allows residential customers who are unable to access solar power on their own, due to a lack of sun, bad credit, etc., enjoy the benefits of solar. This is a potential area of growth for the solar industry, as are solar-plus-storage buildouts, floating solar PV modules, and expansion into other areas of the country. 5 3Transmission infrastructure is needed for the solar industry to expand. Unfortunately, transmission projects are often impeded by permitting delays. Thanks to governmental support (more on this below), many of these delays will disappear in 2022, making it much easier for companies to expand transmission infrastructure. Once this happens, sales reps can sell solar systems to many more people. 4Governmental Commitments As mentioned above, 22 states and Washington D.C. support community solar. In addition, 38 states offer solar incentives to stimulate interest. And that’s to say nothing of the Biden administration’s hope to decarbonize the U.S. economy by 50% in the next 8 years. The government is in the solar industry’s corner, which is another strong indicator of growth. 6Greater InfrastructureTHE SOLAR INDUSTRY: WHERE DO WE STAND IN 2022? 5Economic ImpactTHE SOLAR INDUSTRY: WHERE DO WE STAND IN 2022? While the general growth of the solar industry is all but assured, economic experts say consumers will have less money to spend on projects like solar in 2022. All in all, the future of the solar industry is bright. Let’s examine the ways in which sales teams can take advantage, starting with the most common sales motions in this field.Despite this, most believe home-building and home improvement projects will continue through 2023, though businesses should protect themselves by building up cash reserves and investing in ways to improve cost and revenue efficiency. We should also mention that the impact of a recession could be counteracted by the fact that solar systems almost always save their owners money. But solar sales reps will really have to hammer home the economic benefits of solar to ensure record-level growth this year. 7 Common Solar Sales MotionsTHE SOLAR INDUSTRY: WHERE DO WE STAND IN 2022? CANVASSER • CLOSER • INSTALLEREvery solar sales team is unique, but the methods they use to close deals are often similar. Here are the three most common sales motions in the solar industry: This sales motion begins with a canvasser, who contacts potential customers to see if they’d be interested in purchasing solar panels to power their homes. The goal of the canvasser is not to make sales— it’s to set appointments. When an appointment is set, the potential deal is handed off to a closer, who, as the name suggests, attempts to configure solutions, pitch them to prospects, and, ultimately, close deals. Once a deal is won, it’s transferred to an install team, which builds out the purchased product.1 CALL CENTER • CLOSER • INSTALLER2 This sales motion requires both inside and outside sales teams. It’s most commonly used b y solar companies with an established market presence, as these brands are best positioned to capitalize on the inbound leads their marketing team generates. First, setters, i.e. inside sales professionals, contact prospects to gener ate interest and set appointments. When an appointment is set, the prospect is handed off to a closer who, much lik e in the first sales motion, presents a solution to a prospect, and, hopefully , closes a deal. Once won, the deal is transferred to an install team, which builds out the purchased solar system. FULL-CYCLE SALES • INSTALLER3 New solar companies with small sales teams are most likely to use the full-cycle sales > installer sales motion. Why? Because it requires fewer resources to implement. In this scenario, sales reps canvass specific areas and generate their own leads. Once a potential customer agrees to meet with them, they pitch their company’s products. If they’re able to close a deal, they hand it off to the install team so they can build it. 8 Optimizing the Solar Sales FunnelLEVERAGE EACH MOMENT OF THE BUYER’S JOURNEY At the end of the day, solar sales is a numbers game. The more doors your reps knock, the more people they meet, leading to a greater number of deals won. The best way to ensure a full pipeline is to set appropriate sales activity goals for your reps and closely monitor those goals to make sure your team stays on track. Doing so will help you understand how each of your reps is performing in the field and allows you to create predictable outcomes for your entire sales organization. Now, let’s talk about the solar sales funnel and how you can optimize yours. The Solar Sales FunnelLEVERAGE EACH MOMENT OF THE BUYER’S JOURNEY PROSPECTING CONNECTING CONSIDERING DECISION POST-WINFirst, solar sales teams identify potential customers to contact. This is known as the Prospecting stage. The better your team is at prospecting, the more likely they are to close deals at a consistent clip, which will help them generate more revenue for your company. After Prospecting comes Connecting , i.e. the stage of the funnel in which sales reps actually contact potential customers. The goal at this stage of the sales process is not to mak e sales— it’s to set appointments. Once a rep sets an appointment with a prospect, said prospect mo ves into the Considering stage. This is when sales reps pitch, follow up, answer questions and attempt to mak e sales. Ne xt comes the Decision stage. At this point, prospects have all the information they need to make a purchase. The question is, will they follow through and become a customer? Finally, we have the Post-Win stage. Just because a sales rep closes a deal doesn’t mean their work is done. After a customer signs on the dotted line, the rep needs to ensure the installation process goes off without a hitch. Now that we’ve given you a basic overview of the solar sales funnel, let’s take a closer look at each individual stage. That way, we can share a few tips to help you find more success.1 2 3 4 10 ProspectingTHE SOLAR SALES FUNNEL The keys to effective prospecting are the planning that goes into it, and the measurement of how your team is performing. Knowing the audience of an area and having a plan in place before you begin working the territory is critical to ensuring your teams are staying productive and give them the advantage to close more deals.PROSPECTING STAGE BEST PRACTICESDoors Knocked The average number of houses visited per rep per day Contact Attempts Number of calls, emails, or text messages by your reps each dayKNOW THE NUMBERS KEY PROSPECTING METRICS AVERAGE BETTER BEST 25 per day50 per day 40 per day75 per day 50+ per day100+ per day 11 ProspectingTHE SOLAR SALES FUNNEL These are the bits of information your sales team needs before it engages potential customers. Fortunately, details of this nature aren’t difficult to find.Home Ownership: Renters won’t want to talk to you about solar. Why would they? They don’t own their homes and, therefore, don’t have the ability to equip them with solar panels. Eliminate renters from your leads list during the prospecting process. Home Value: Larger, more valuable homes tend to have higher electricity bills. People with high electricity bills are generally more open to solar because it helps them save money. When prospecting, move expensive houses to the top of your list. Credit Score: As you know, most solar systems are financed in some way. Because of this, it makes sense to focus your sales efforts on prospects with good credit. Most credit scores aren’t public knowledge, but basic income data is. Since a majority of high-earners have good credit, try selling to these folks first. Location: Finally, make sure your reps check the geographical location of every lead on their prospect list before engaging them in conversation. Does the lead’s home face the right direction? Does it get enough sun or is it overly shaded? Is there enough area to install solar panels? • For homeownership, home value, and general income data, use a tool like City-Data.com . Once you navigate to this website, you can easily search specific areas for these details, using the City-Data.com interactive map and filter system. • T o learn more about the geographical location of your leads, use a tool like Google Earth , which will allow you to gauge a home’s solar potential without visiting it in real life. Simply type in an address and then assess it for sun, shading, available space, etc.The first step to ensuring your teams are spending time in the right areas is knowing who the audience is. Many companies have a trial-and-error approach where canvassers will talk to a few people in an area before determining if it’s worth investing more time. It’s a simple and effective approach, but could be a waste of time if you knew some details ahead of time. This is where lead intelligence comes in. A good lead database will help y ou see more information about the leads in an area beforehand so you can avoid wasting time altogether. Below are the key factors that you should look for when evaluating a lead intelligence platform: 12QUALIFYING LEADS ProspectingTHE SOLAR SALES FUNNEL Based on the above, you can see that there’s not a lot of overlap for the best times to be in each type of neighborhood. Once you figure out the homeowner “rhythms” of an area, you can optimize your canvassing efforts by assigning different areas to your reps at certain times of the day. Shift Workers: Homeowners in these areas are often working during shift hours. Best times to canvass are from 9:00 am - 11:00 am or after 3:00 pm Monday-Saturday and all day Sunday. Retirees: Neighborhoods with older homeowners are more likely to be home throughout the day. Best times to work in these areas are 10:00 am - 3:00 pm Monday through Friday. White Collar: These homeowners have typical 9-5 jobs, so they won’t be home during the day Best times to work in these areas are after 6:00 pm Monday-Friday and all day Saturdays and Sundays. Every sales manager has the same job: to improve the performance for their sales department. They do this by analyzing data, then using it to coach reps. That way, they can achieve more individually, resulting in greater team success. You can’t manage what you can’t measure. Unfortunately, since field sales reps are out and about, monitoring their activity is difficult, manual, and time consuming. Despite this, ha ving a consistent process to track team activity and performance is the most critical way to ensure your success. When working correctly, a strong activity monitoring process has a wide range of benefits: • Improves team accountability • Improves forecast accuracy • Boosts productivity • Motivates reps • Enhances manager coaching • Provides insights for further optimizationExpert canvassers will tell you that every neighborhood you work in is different, so treating them all the same is not always going to provide the best results. You need to learn a bit more about the area to understand when people will be home so that your teams have a better chance of connecting with buyers. Often, you won’t know what that area’s homeowner “rhythms” are until you actually get there, but once you figure it out, you should adjust your plans accordingly. Here are some general tips on the types of neighborhoods you will encounter and what times are best for your teams to work them: 13FIND THE RIGHT TIME ACTIVITY MONITORING ConnectingTHE SOLAR SALES FUNNEL KNOW THE NUMBERS Inside Sales Connect Rate Percentage of contact attempts resulting in initial conversations Canvassing Connect Rate Percentage of door knocks resulting in initial conversations T erritory Saturation Percentage of leads in each area your teams have contactedKEY CONNECTING METRICS AVERAGE 15%7% 33%BETTER 25%10% 50%BEST 33%+12%+ 70%+ Appointments Set Percentage of initial conversations resulting in actual meetings20% 25% 30%+ Connecting is more than just getting people to answer the door to talk to your team. This is where the rubber meets the road because doing well at this stage greatly impacts how y ou perform later in the funnel. This is achieved by focusing on the series of activities before, during, and after canvassing to ensure your team has a better chance to succeed. Keep reading to view our tips to maximize your team’s potential.CONNECTING STAGE BEST PRACTICES 14 ConnectingTHE SOLAR SALES FUNNEL You’ve already qualified leads, but online research will only tell you so much about a person. You need to talk to them to find out if they’re really interested in solar. Have your reps ask these seven open-ended sales questions (or ones like them) to pinpoint quality leads. An open-ended question is any question that can’t be answered with one word, like yes or no. As such, they force prospects to open up, which helps sales reps learn about their audience. • What motivated you to talk with me today? • What concerns do you have about solar energy? • What does your budget look like for this project? • Why isn’t your currently energy plan working for you? • What would $X extra every month do for you? • What would stop you from investing in solar? • How soon are you looking to invest in solar? Once your canvasser, inside sales rep, or field seller has confirmed that their lead is, in fact, a potential customer, they should attempt to set up a future appointment with them. T o help with this, ask your reps to keep these things in mind: Know Your Objective: Remember, at this point in the sales process, the goal is to set an appointment, not to make a sale. Make sure canvassers, setters, and/or sales reps understand this. That way they don’t push too hard and make their leads uneasy. Deliver an Elevator Pitch: When talking with leads, make the benefits of solar clear. Reps can do this by sharing a value statement, mentioning common problems that your company solves, and talking about current customers they’ve already helped. Create Urgency: Try to stress the importance of why setting an appointment sooner rather than later is in the buyer’s best interest. Get Specific: When reps ask for appointments, make sure they suggest specific times and clarify the details of the appointment. Prospects should know where the meeting will tak e place, who will be there, and what will be discussed. Timing is Everything: The further out the appointment date, the more likely they will forget or have second thoughts. Set appointments that are less than 14 days out for best results. 15QUALIFY LEADS SET APPOINTMENTS ConnectingTHE SOLAR SALES FUNNEL If you’ve been in the solar game for any length of time, you know that solar buyers are notorious for blowing off appointments. This is incredibly frustrating, considering how much effort has been made to get buyers to this point. T o minimize cancellations, you need a process to continually remind buyers about their appointments in the days —and even hours—leading up to their scheduled meeting. That way, potential buyers remain aware of upcoming appointments and can clear their schedules for them, or reschedule ahead of time, if needed. A meeting reminder process is a good start, but it isn’t foolproof—especially if you’re relying on reps to send reminders manually. We suggest creating a system that automatically sends email and/ or text reminders to prospects to avoid scheduling issues and prevent wasted trips. According to industry experts, having an automated process in place will reduce your no-show rate by as much as 10-15%, which means more chances for your team to get the win. What do your reps do after they canvass an area? Smart solar teams go back and recanvass those neighborhoods until they talk to a sufficient number of homeowners in the area—usually around 60-70%. This allows them to get in touch with anyone they missed the first time through—especially if said reps are already returning to an area to follow-up with leads. Most reps think re-canvassing areas is a waste of time, but returning to an area actually increases familiarity and reduces skepticism, so buyers will be more likely to want to talk to you. Our research suggests that returning to neighborhoods until you reach at least 60% saturation can result in up to 25% more appointments per territory. When re-canvassing an area, encourage your reps to name drop the people that have already set appointments. Doing so will improve their credibility in the neighborhood and further reduce any skepticism a buyer may have about your company’s offering. 16APPOINTMENT REMINDERS WHEN TO RECANVASS ConsideringTHE SOLAR SALES FUNNEL Appointments Sit Rate Percentage of leads that attend and complete their appointments Opportunities Qualified Percentage of appointments that are able and likely to buy Follow-Up Attempts Number of times your reps follow up with leads after the initial appointmentKNOW THE NUMBERS KEY CONSIDERING METRICS AVERAGE BETTER BEST 60%50% 2 attempts per opportunity70%60% 80%+70%+ 5 attempts per opportunity8+ attempts per opportunity Now that you’ve gotten a prospect to their initial appointment, how do you ensure you don’t lose them? The Considering stage is where the true “art of selling” becomes an essential factor. All that time you’ve spent focusing on technique and delivery will start to pay off here. That being said, there are still some areas that should be considered to help improve your chances.CONSIDERING STAGE BEST PRACTICES 17 ConsideringTHE SOLAR SALES FUNNEL Every sales pitch should answer three important questions: 1. Why does solar make sense for this specific customer? If your reps don’t answer this question, they won’t make many sales. Fortunately, the benefits of solar are clear: smaller electricity bills, clean energy, increased home value, etc. 2. What is meaningful, unique, and different about your company? You don’t want your prospects to invest in solar. You want them to invest in solar with your company. T o make sure they do this, reps need to communicate the benefits of your organization. Focus on what sets you apart from other solar companies in a meaningful, unique, and different way. Pick two topics from the list of unique selling propositions below and hammer them home for the best impact: 3. Why should this specific customer invest in solar right now? Many people are interested in solar. Your reps need to make sure their prospects are so interested in this technology that they invest in it today. Rising utility costs, tax breaks, and limited-time opportunities are all reasons for customers to act now. For most sales professionals, 1-in-5 of all your appointments will be no-shows. But, a 35-45% no-show rate is not uncommon in residential solar since you work on the buyer’s time. One study even estimates that every time a lead no-shows, a rep loses 5% of their income for that week. Additionally, roughly 55% of all no-shows are because the prospect became busy or just forgot. This means that the majority of no-shows are probably still interested. The way your reps handle these situations is important. Do they accept a loss and move on to the next deal? Or does your sales team have a process in place to re-engage prospects after a no-show appointment? We suggest the latter option. Having a fast and painless process for rescheduling no- show appointments can improve your appointment sit rate by an additional 10-15% , on average.• Cost or value - You’re most cost-effective or can offer better savings • Features or capabilities - You can provide things that competitors can’t • Customer service - Your team is the best at making customers feel valued • User experience - You are the easiest to get started or use moving forward • Reliability - Your solution is more rugged and dependable • Configurability - Users can customize their solution more easily to fit their needs • Reputation - Your company is well known and trusted by many other buyers Whatever your company’s unique selling proposition (USP) is, make sure that potential customers know about it. 18NAIL THE PITCH “NO SHOW” PROCESS ConsideringTHE SOLAR SALES FUNNEL Don’t worry, you don’t need to be an ace designer to accomplish this. There are plenty of proposal templates online that you can use. All you have to know is what to include in your solar proposals. Here are a few elements, besides price and legalese, that we suggest: Prospect Concerns: What does your prospect care about? Potential savings, tax breaks, and environmental factors are all common reasons to invest in solar. Your proposal should re- address the concerns your specific customers have. Customer T estimonials: Your prospects aren’t just investing in solar; they’re investing in your company. Put them at ease by adding a few customer reviews and your company’s star rating on third-party sites like Google and Yelp to your proposals. Design Details: Your customers like seeing what they spend their money on. Including a design of the system you are installing is a great way to help them see what they are buying and help build excitement about their purchase decision. Finally, your proposals should be clear and easy to sign. In this day and age, that means creating digital proposals that your prospects can sign with their fingers. Imagine how much more professional your sales reps will look when they pull out a tablet for prospects to sign rather than a stack of papers. While this may seem like a trivial thing, it matters— especially when selling something as costly as a complete solar system. One-visit closes are rare in the solar industry. More often than not, the leads your reps speak to will need time to consider their purchase. This isn’t an issue—as long as your reps follow-up and nurture their prospects on a regular basis. Studies suggest that 80% of sales require at least five follow-ups. This number will obviously vary depending on the kind of solar systems you sell, the price of said systems, the specific customers you target, etc. But, in general, if your reps aren’t following up, they’re leaving money on the table. Getting a foot in the door and scheduling appointments with prospectiv e buy ers tak es a lot of work. Don’t let these opportunities “die on the vine. ” Follow up and close more deals! 19CREATE EYE-CATCHING PROPOSALS MAKE IT EASY TO SAY “YES!” FOLLOW UP (OFTEN) DecisionTHE SOLAR SALES FUNNEL Sales Cycle Length The average time to take a deal from prospect to closed-won Deals Won Percentage of opportunities that convert to customersKNOW THE NUMBERS KEY DECISION METRICS AVERAGE BETTER BEST 60%8-9 months 70%7-8 months 80%+6 or less months Obviously, the goal here is to get your potential buyers to sign the deal. Seems simple, right? The truth is, getting to a decision effectively and quickly can become a real challenge depending on the types of buyers you are working with, and the regulatory hoops you have to jump through. DECISION STAGE BEST PRACTICES 20 DecisionTHE SOLAR SALES FUNNEL We’ve said it before, and we’ll say it again: investing in solar is a big decision. Yes, solar panels almost always save their owners money. Yes, solar panels can increase the value of a home. Still, some people have a hard time looking past the initial price tag of solar systems. T o prevent cold feet, make sure your prospects understand precisely how much their solar system will cost, how long it will take to pay off, the money they’ll save every month, and the impact of solar on their home’s value. This brings us to our next point… Solar energy is increasingly common. Unfortunately, some realtors don’t understand the industry. As such, they may encourage their clients to back out of deals. Here’s the truth: solar panels can increase a home’s value by $4,020 to $5,911 per kilowatt. The average solar system for a mid-size U.S. home is five kilowatts, which means solar panels can boost the value of most homes in America by $20k to $25k. Before a prospect officially cancels a deal, reps should sit down with them and their real estate agent to explain the facts. Oftentimes, this will save the deal. There are a number of reasons why someone may not choose to buy what your selling. So, it’s important to remember that ‘closed lost’ prospects may not ready to buy right now, but could still be interested in the future. By continuing to nurture these prospects with consistent and helpful information, y ou can maintain top-of-mind awareness for your brand and be ready to re-engage with prospects when their circumstances have changed.Buyers Get Cold Feet Real Estate Agents Misunderstand Solar “Closed Lost” May Not Be Permanent 21If your reps do their jobs effectively, they shouldn’t have to do much during the Decision stage, other than stay in touch with their prospects. That said, even the most diligent solar sales rep will lose deals at the last minute. Here are the three most common reasons why: Just because someone wants solar panels, doesn’t mean they’ll be able to acquire financing for them. And without financing, most of your company’s prospects will have to bow out. That’s why it’s so important to prequalify leads. Your reps should never waste time talking to prospects with bad credit, as these folks won’t qualify for financing. Use the tips we outlined in the “Prospecting” section of this guide to avoid this pitfall.Buyers Can’t Secure FinancingTOP 4 REASONS FOR LOST SOLAR DEALS DecisionTHE SOLAR SALES FUNNEL 22Solar is increasingly becoming cost-competitive with conventional fuels in many parts of the country. Still, the Solar Energy Industry Association estimates that the average customer decision time for “going solar” is 8.9 months, and customer acquisition costs make up 10-15 percent of the total price of a solar system. That’s far longer than the average car sales cycle and most enterprise software sales cycles, where the purchase prices can be much higher. So for solar installers across America, the question remains: How do we get to “y es” faster and cheaper? Below are a few tried-and-true methods that some companies have been leveraging to improve their sales cycles and lower customer acquisition costs dramatically: Concentrate: Start in a specific neighborhood or community and build a concentr ated customer base through referrals and networks. People are more likely to get solar if they live in proximity to homes that already have it. This can decrease the sales cycle from 8.9 months to three months on average as customers see and hear real testimonials. Second-Mover Advantage: For smaller solar providers, you don’t have to be the first in the market or neighborhood to be successful. In fact, it may play to your advantage to work in areas where more prominent brands have already paved the way. By following the leader, you can spend less to educate customers and sell a differentiated product based on the value y ou provide to customers. Simplicity Sells: Solar can be complex, but you don’t want to communicate complexity to the customer. Your consultation must be simple — you pay “X” for “Y” results. The more sales leaders can simplify the sales process for the customer, the less likely they are to distract customers with tangents and doubt. Focus on Value: If you don’t believe that solar provides real value for consumers, your customers won’t either. Consumers who install solar see significant savings every month — savings that can add up to more than 4% of their pre-tax income, and that number gets better when traditional energy rates continue to rise. Drive Urgency: It’s easy for a customer to say that they will look at your proposal later and then forget about it. Create a sense of urgency by pointing out when tax credits are expiring, state credits are limited, or when you are offering a special for the month. Encouraging a decision “in the now” is critical.GET TO “YES” FASTER Post-WinTHE SOLAR SALES FUNNEL You’ve made a sale — congratulations! But your team’s work isn’t done yet. There are a few things they should do after they close a deal: We suggest checking in with new customers during the installation phase. Doing so will make them feel valued and allow your reps to address concerns before they become major problems. All in all, it will make the installation process go much smoother. Unfortunately, deals can fall through after contracts are secured. It doesn’t happen often, but reps can lose momentum and confidence when it does. It’s understandable. Typically, deals fall through at this stage due to complications with the installer, supply or permit issues, extended project timelines, and even poor workmanship. Remind your reps to stay engaged throughout this process to ensure a smooth handoff. Doing so will dramatically minimize project issues and prevent lost accounts during this stage. Finally, ask your reps to recanvass neighborhoods after securing a new deal. That’s right, have them go to each of their new customer’s neighbors—even if these folks have already rebuffed them in the past—and ask to book an appointment with them. Fear of missing out, better known as FOMO, is real. 69% of millennials, the largest population group in the U.S., admitted to experiencing FOMO. Your new customer will act as a “foothold” or “anchor” in the neighborhood. (Continues on next page)Another benefit to following-up post-win is that you can ask for referrals. Referrals are a boon for any business, but they’re particularly beneficial in solar sales. Why? Because solar leads aren’t exactly cheap. According to Exclusive Leads Agency, it can cost anywhere from $150-$200 to generate an appointment-ready lead, but the best solar leads are often worth between $500 to $1000 to the businesses that secure them. Referred leads are free. More than that, referred leads tend to be higher quality because the potential customer is already familiar with and trusts your company. Recanvass (Again!) 23FOLLOW UP (AGAIN!) ASK FOR REFERRALS RECANVASS (AGAIN!) Post-WinTHE SOLAR SALES FUNNEL (Continued from the previous page) Once others see your company putting solar panels on a house, they’ll immediately think, “Wow, if they are getting solar, maybe we should look into that, too. ” Then, when a rep shows up a day later to talk about solar systems, they’ll be less skeptical, view your reps as more credible, and be much more willing to schedule an appointment. Recanvassing also plays into the “Rule of 7, ” which states that a prospect must hear about a company’s product or service seven times before purchasing it. The more times you approach a prospect about solar, the more likely they are to buy it—within reason, of course. Most solar sales pros know that getting from a signed contract to a completed installation can be a rocky road. The most common culprit? Change orders. In practical terms, a change order is any change to the initial design that may or may not incur additional costs to the project. These can range from something as simple as just moving a module to a complete redesign to accommodate a previously-unknown complication. On average, it’s estimated that 20-30% of all solar jobs are impacted by change orders resulting in $500-600 in additional costs. Considering that nearly half of all change orders stem from the compan y missing something in the initial design, these can significantly impact your bottom line. Here are a handful of things to consider to mitigate your changes: • Ensure designers are performing on-site surveys • Have a comprehensive checklist of all the things to check during site visits • Leverage aerial imaging to get a more accurate view of the job site • Work closely with contractors on the design finalization • Have a thorough understanding of your contracts • Train reps to be comfortable with saying “no” 24CHANGE ORDER MANAGEMENT More Tips from the ProsBEST PRACTICES The most critical factor in getting deals moved is showing potential buyers the numbers. Getting an accurate savings estimate requires copies of their utility bill, which many homeowners will hesitate to provide. Rather than just asking for their bill directly, have your reps put the ball in their court by tying it to their goals, using a more outcome-based approach: “I want to deliver you your savings estimate, what’s the best way to send this to you?” Once they confirm the method, tell them you need the bill to get a more accurate idea of their savings. Using this approach can help ensure your reps are twice as likely to get the utility bill in one motion, move more deals through the pipeline, and close deals faster. Being a solar salesperson can be tricky to get right. While many companies do have training programs, they tend to focus on just a few areas that are most critical for your team’s day-to-day sales motion. Training on topics like a sales process and how to pitch are common, but the best reps tend to be much more well-rounded. Some of this comes from e xperience, but a lot of it can be trained. Below are the top four additional areas to focus on in your training program that are proven to improve sales performance: T each them to fish If you use a canvasser/closer model, your closers could prospect between appointments. Setting goals and training on how to prospect effectively will help your teams maintain a consistent workload during lean times and improve their sales numbers.Product knowledge Your customers expect your reps to know your product well. Every time they don’t have an answer for a customer, they lose credibility and give your buyers one more reason to say no. Focus on technical training and test reps to ensure they understand the products to improve close rates. Network building: Word-of-mouth is the best way to reach your audience. Unfortunately, knowing how to network effectively is not straightforward. Show your reps how to connect with the community, where to look, and the tactics that work to drive inbound leads. Customer consideration: In solar, there’s no such thing as a one-size-fits- all solution. Skilled consultants can intuit what the customer needs are and tailor the solution to fit a specific need and financial situation. Your customers will see that you are helping them and will be more likely to commit.GET THE UTILITY BILL (QUICKL Y) TRAIN FOR “ALL-ROUNDERS” 25 Imagine a world where your teams didn’t have to knock doors to generate new leads. In residential solar, you don’t necessarily need a fancy marketing campaign or inbound sales team to succeed. You need to motivate your already-satisfied customers to promote your company on your behalf. Many top-performing residential solar companies rely heavily on referrals and word-of-mouth marketing, with some seeing as much as 20-30% of their leads generated from referral programs. Here are some of the basics to help you get started: Referral Incentives Your customers are the best place to start for referrals. Have a process to make it easy for them to refer their friends and neighbors to your company. For best results, offer a bonus for referred leads and be sure to pay them on a timely basis. We suggest $250-500 to start, depending on your average deal size.Community Networking You and your teams should be dedicating 2-3 hours a week to networking within your selling area. It takes time to see results, but once you get a referral program in place, the results are truly impressive. Good places to start include Facebook and NextDoor groups, Homeowner Associations, Chambers of Commerce/Rotary Clubs, and community events.nts.REFERRALS, REFERRALS, REFERRALS The solar industry is already rife with competition and it’s only going to get harder in the future. It’s estimated that there are now over 10,000 solar providers in each state across the country - a number that is expected to grow significantly as federal, state, and local incentives expand and solar systems become cheaper. With so many companies vying for the same business, it will become increasingly difficult to remain relevant and competitive. Companies that make an investment in technology to enhance their performance are more likely to survive the competition today and thrive in the future. Below is a list of proven software types and solution providers to help you become more efficient and effective than ever before: • Customer Relationship Management (CRM): Solo CRM, Salesforce, Zoho • Project Management: Solo CRM, Job Nimbus, AccuLynx • Proposals and Design: Solo CRM, Aurora Solar • Sales Engagement: SPOTIO (of course) • Aerial Imaging: EagleView, NearMapINVEST IN YOUR TEAM’S TECHNOLOGY 26 As the old saying goes, “preparation is the key to success” . In the case of solar sales, that couldn’t be more true. Part of that preparation comes in the form of equipping your sales teams with materials and training that will enable them to have more efficient and effective conversations with potential buyers. Doing this successfully means you need to have materials that focus on the questions that buyers will have at each stage of the buyer’s journey. Here’s what we recommend to help get your sales enablement program started: Depending on the areas you are selling, there are several different tax incentives that your buyers can take advantage of at the local, state, and federal levels. Your consultants aren’t tax experts, but many homeowners will rely on them to answer particular questions about what those incentives are, how they work, and what that means for their bottom line. Your success in closing deals often depends heavily on your ability to articulate these in a way that buyers easily understand. T ailoring tax-related collateral to the specific area you are selling in and training your reps to know the details will greatly improve your chances of success in closing deals quickly and efficiently.T op-of-Funnel (TOFU) TOFU content should be shared early in the sales process and focus on problem awareness. Ideally, this kind of content will make up 40% of your content library. When creating TOFU content, ask yourself questions like, “Who is our company, and what do we do?” and “Is the way we do business working for our audience?”Middle-of-Funnel (MOFU) MOFU content should be shared once a prospect is fully aware of their problem, i.e., their need for solar, and should focus on solution awareness. Ideally, this content will make up another 40% of your content library. When creating MOFU content, ask yourself questions like, “Why should our audience care?” and “How does this solve their problem?”Bottom-of-Funnel (BOFU) BOFU content should be shared at the end of the sales cycle and focus on product awareness. Ideally, it will make up the last 20% of your sales enablement materials. When creating BOFU content, ask yourself questions like, “What value our product provide?” and “Why should our audience choose our solution?” Examples of TOFU content: Videos, trend and benchmarking reports, infographics, blogs, and advertorialsExamples of MOFU content: Live and pre-recorded webinars, videos, blogs, whitepapers, eBooks, infographics, and hero contentExamples of BOFU content: Case studies, brochures, product videos, testimonials, peer reviews, recorded demos, ROI calculators, website, and survey resultsTHE IMPORTANCE OF SALES ENABLEMENT UNDERSTAND THE TAX INCENTIVES (FULL Y) 27 28SPOTIO is the #1 sales engagement tool that’s built specifically for outside sales teams. Use our industry-leading software to find quality solar leads quickly and easily book appointments and hand them off to closers, plan the most effective routes between leads, manage territories, automate communication with prospects, track sales, and more. Request your free demo of SPOTIO today to see if it’s the right platform for your solar company. 5057 Keller Springs Rd., Ste 325, Addison, TX, 75001 © SPOTIO, Inc. 2022****
